As we are quickly approaching the close of this age with the blessed hope in view of the dawning of a new age - even the millennium, it is no surprise that the hearts of God's children are increasingly drawn to the last book of the Bible, Revelation. Whereas in the past that book was shunned by most as not being understandable, now it is looked upon as a blessed book, just as it is written of it: "Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things that are written therein: for the time is at hand" (Rev 1:3).

In the study of Revelation, however, there are certain basic things one must know in order to understand this book. The lack of such fundamental knowledge has kept people in the past from reading it and it still presents a problem to those who are now studying it. In order to encourage God's children to study, Watchman Nee in the nineteen-twenties prepared aids to the book of Revelation and published them in serial form in Christian magazine, from Volume 2 to Volume 23. Although these writings belong to his early days, the light released remains nonetheless undiminished through the years since that time. They offer invaluable helps to all who love the word of God.

In this present volume, then, the author deals with the attitude the believers should have towards the book of Revelation as well as the ways and means of understanding it. He presents the different schools of interpretation concerning Revelation and offers the key to its right interpretation. He touches upon the distinction between salvation and reward, the four kinds of judgment, and the spiritual significance of numerals in the Bible since these are essential to rightly dividing the word of truth. He compares the prophecies in Revelation with the other prophecies of the Bible - such as Daniel's human image and the seventy sevens, the Olivet prophecy of our Lord, and Paul's prophecy found in 2 Thessalonians. Finally he summarizes the great events of the future as given in Revelation according to their respective times, and suggests a detailed outline of the book.

May the Lord use this volume to help many to read, to hearken, and to keep the things written in the book of Revelation.