Faith makes all things possible... love makes all things easy.

“He who kneels the most, stands the best.” 

“If I take care of my character, my reputation will take care of itself.” 

“The best way to show that a stick is crooked is not to argue about it or to spend time denouncing it, but to lay a straight stick alongside it” 

“Out of 100 men, one will read the Bible, the other 99 will read the Christian.” 

“I firmly believe that the moment our hearts are emptied of selfishness and ambition and self-seeking and everything that is contrary to God's law, the Holy Spirit will come and fill every corner of our hearts; but if we are full of pride and conceit, ambition and self-seeking, pleasure and the world, there is no room for the Spirit of God. I also believe that many a man is praying to God to fill him, when he is full already with something else. Before we pray that God would fill us, I believe we ought to pray that He would empty us. There must be a n emptying before there can be a filling; and when the heart is turned upside down, and everything that is contrary to God is turned out, then the Spirit will come...” 

“Our greatest fear should not be of failure, but of succeeding at something that doesn't really matter.” 

“The Bible was not given for our information but for our transformation.” 

“Character is what you are in the dark.” 

“Every great movement of God can be traced to a kneeling figure.”

“We can stand affliction better than we can prosperity, for in prosperity we forget God.” 

“If our circumstances find us in God, we shall find God in all our circumstances."

“A holy life will produce the deepest impression. Lighthouses blow no horns; they only shine.”

“The Bible will keep you from sin, or sin will keep you from the Bible.”

“Faith makes all things possible. Love makes them easy.” 

“I have had more trouble with myself than with any other man I have ever met.”

“If you can't see His way past the tears, trust His heart.” 

“The object of the Bible is not to tell how good men are, but how bad men can become good.” 

“No one can sum up all God is able to accomplish through one solitary life, wholly yielded, adjusted, and obedient to Him.” 

“I never saw a fruit-bearing Christian who was not a student of the Bible.” 

So few grow, because so few study.” 

“Someone has said that there are four things necessary in studying the Bible: Admit, submit, commit and transmit.” 

“What we need as Christians is to be able to feed ourselves. How many there are who sit helpless and listless, with open mouths, hungry for spiritual things, and the minister has to try to feed them, while the Bible is a feast prepared, into which they never venture.” 

“‎"I look upon this world as a wrecked vessel. God has given me a lifeboat and said, 'Moody, save all you can.” 

“Falsehoods not only disagree with truth, but usually quarell among themselves.”

“God never made a promise that was too good to be true.” 

“A great many men are kept out of the kingdom of God because they are looking for somebody else’s experience—the experience their grandmother had, their aunt, or some one in the family.” 

“Depend upon it, my friends, if you get tired of the Word of God, and it becomes wearisome to you, you are out of communion with Him.”

"Keep us little and unknown, prized and loved by God alone."

“If God did not wish us to understand the book of Revelation, He would not have given it to us at all.” 

A great many people are trying to make peace, but that has already been done. 
God has not left it for us to do; all we have to do is to enter into it.

Careful for nothing, prayerful for everything, thankful for anything.

Prayer does not mean that I am to bring God down to my thoughts and my 
purposes, and bend his government according to my foolish, silly, and 
sometimes sinful notions. Prayer means that I am to be raised up into feeling, 
into union and design with him; that I am to enter into his counsel and carry 
out his purpose fully.

Some people think God does not like to be troubled with our constant coming 
and asking. The way to trouble God is not to come at all.

The Christian on his knees sees more than the philosopher on tiptoe. 
God sends no one away empty except those who are full of themselves

Small numbers make no difference to God. There is nothing small if God is in 
it.

I am only one, but I am one. I cannot do everything, but I can do something. And that which I can do, by the grace of God, I will do.

If a man gets drunk and goes out and breaks his leg so that it must be 
amputated, God will forgive him if he asks it, but he will have to hop around 
on one leg all his life.

Man is born with his face turned away from God. When he truly repents, he is 
turned right round toward God; he leaves his old life.

Man is born with his face turned away from God. When he truly repents, he is 
turned right round toward God; he leaves his old life.

Salvation is worth working for. It is worth a man's going round the world on 
his hands and knees, climbing its mountains, crossing its valleys, swimming 
its rivers, going through all manner of hardship in order to attain it. But we 
do not get it in that way. It is to him who believes.

I believe Satan to exist for two reasons: first, the Bible says so; and 
second, I've done business with him.

The great preacher F. B. Meyer once asked D. L. Moody, "What is the secret of 
your success?" Moody replied, "For many years I have never given an address 
without the consciousness that the Lord may come before I have finished."