Introduction
David assembles the princes of Israel, and informs them that the temple was to be built by Solomon; to whom God had given the most gracious promises, 1 Chronicles 28:1-7. He exhorts them and him to be obedient to God, that they might continue to prosper, 1 Chronicles 28:8-10. He gives Solomon a pattern of the work, 1 Chronicles 28:11, 1 Chronicles 28:12; directs him concerning the courses of the priests and Levites, 1 Chronicles 28:13; gives also gold, by weight, for the different utensils of the temple, as God had directed him, 1 Chronicles 28:14-19; encourages Solomon to undertake the work, 1 Chronicles 28:20, 1 Chronicles 28:21.

Verse 1
David assembled - This refers to the persons whose names and offices we have seen in the preceding chapter.

Verse 2
David - stood up upon his feet - He was now very old, and chiefly confined to his bed, (see 1 Kings 1:47); and while he was addressing his son Solomon, he continued on the bed; but when all the principal nobles of his kingdom came before him he received strength to arise and address them, standing on his feet.

Verse 3
Thou shalt not build a house - See 2 Samuel 7:6, 2 Samuel 7:13, and the observations at the end of that chapter.

Verse 4
Over Israel for ever - The government should have no end, provided they continued to walk according to the commandments of God; see 1 Chronicles 28:7. The government, as referring to Christ, is, and will be, without end.

Verse 8
In the audience of our God - “Before the Word of the Lord.” - T.

Verse 10
The Lord hath chosen thee - “The Word of the Lord hath chosen thee.” - T.

Verse 11
David gave to Solomon - the pattern - He gave him an ichnograph of the building, with elevations, sections, and specifications of every part; and all this he received by inspiration from God himself, (see 1 Chronicles 28:12, 1 Chronicles 28:19), just as Moses had received the plan of the tabernacle.

The treasuries thereof - גנזכיו (ganzaccaiv). The word גנזך (ganzach) is not Hebrew, but is supposed to be Persian, the same word being found in Ezra 3:1-13:19. In this tongue we have the word (ganj), a granary, a hidden treasure, and (gunjoor), and (gunjineh), a treasure, treasury, or barn. Parkhurst supposes that it is compounded of גנז (ganaz), to treasure up, and זך (zach), pure; a treasury for the most precious things.

Verse 12
All that he had by the Spirit - “By the Spirit of prophecy that was with him.” - T.

Verse 14
Of gold by weight - The quantity of gold which was to be put in each article.

Verse 15
For the candlesticks - There was but one chandelier in the tabernacle; there were ten in the temple. See 1 Kings 7:49.

Verse 18
The chariot of the cherubims - “And the figure of the chariot, like to the figure of the propitiatory, where are the figures of the golden cherubim, extending their wings and covering the ark of the covenant of the Lord.” - T.

Verse 19
Understand in writing - In some vision of ecstasy he had seen a regularly sketched out plan, which had made so deep an impression on his mind that he could readily describe it to his son.
“That the architecture of the temple,” says Dr. Delaney, “was of Divine origin, I, for my part, am fully satisfied from this passage, and am confirmed in this opinion by finding from Vilalpandas that the Roman, at least the Greek, architecture is derived from this, as from its fountain; and in my humble opinion even an infidel may easily believe these to be of Divine original, inasmuch as they are, at least the latter is, found perfect in the earliest models; nor hath the utmost reach of human wisdom, invention, and industry, been ever able to improve it, or alter it but to disadvantage, through the course of so many ages.”

Verse 20
The Lord God - my God, will be with thee - “The Word of the Lord my God will be thy assistant.” - T.

Verse 21
Behold, the courses of the priests - The priests and the Levites, the cunning artificers, and the princes of the people, will be at thy command. Thus David, having assigned him his work, and described the manner in which it was to be done, shows him who were to be his assistants in it, and encourages him in the great undertaking.
Here we find piety, good sense, prudence, zeal for the public welfare and God‘s glory, the strongest attachments to the worship of Jehovah, and concern for the ordinances of religion, all united; and Solomon has his danger, his duty, and his interest placed before him in the truest and most impressive light by his pious and sensible father.