Introduction
The people apply to Rehoboam to ease them of their burdens, 2 Chronicles 10:1-4. Rejecting the advice of the aged counsellors, and following that of the young men, he gives them an ungracious answer, 2 Chronicles 10:5-14. The people are discouraged, and ten tribes revolt, 2 Chronicles 10:15-17. They stone Hadoram, who went to collect the tribute; and Rehoboam but barely escapes, 2 Chronicles 10:18, 2 Chronicles 10:19.

Verse 1
Rehoboam went to Shechem - This chapter is almost word for word the same as 1 Kings 12:1-19, to the notes on which the reader is referred.

Verse 10
My little finger shall be thicker - “My weakness shall be stronger than the might of my father.” - Targum.

Verse 15
For the cause was of God - “For there was an occasion Divinely given.” - Targum.

Verse 16
To your tents, O Israel - “To your cities, O Israel.” - Targum.

Now, David, see to thine own house - “Now, David, rule over the men of thy own house.” - Targum.

Verse 18
Stoned him - When he endeavored to collect the tribute which Solomon had imposed on them. - Jarchi.

Verse 19
Israel rebelled - A few soft words, and the removal of a part of the oppressive taxes, (for they said, Ease thou Somewhat the grievous servitude), would have secured this people to the state, and prevented the shedding of a sea of human blood, which was the consequence of the separation of this kingdom. Rehoboam was a fool; and through his folly he lost his kingdom. He is not the only example on record: the Stuarts lost the realm of England much in the same way; and, by a different mode of treatment, the House of Brunswick continues to fill the British throne. May the thread of its fortune, woven by the hand of God, never be undone! and may the current of its power glide on to the latest posterity!
Talia secla, suis dixerunt, currite, fusis
Concordes stabili fatorum numine Parcae.
Virg. Ecl. iv., ver. 46.
“God‘s firm decree, by which this web was spun,
Shall ever bless the clue, and bid it smoothly run.”
Labitur, et labetur in omne volubilis Aevum.
Horat. Epist., l. i., c. 2, v. 43.
“Still glides the river, and shall ever glide.”
Amen! Amen!