Introduction
In this chapter the prophet gives us a circumstantial account of the measures, parts, chambers, and ornaments of the temple, vv. 1-26.

Verse 1
To the temple - He had first described the courts and the porch. See chap. 40.

Verse 2
The breadth of the door - This was the door, or gate, of the sanctuary, (see gates 3, in the plan), and this doorway was filled up with folding gates. The measurements are exactly the same as those of Solomon‘s temple. See 1 Kings 6:2, 1 Kings 6:17.

Verse 4
The length thereof, twenty cubits - This is the measurement of the sanctuary, or holy of holies. See G in the plan. This also was the exact measurement of Solomon‘s temple, see 1 Kings 6:20. This, and the other resemblances here, sufficiently prove that Ezekiel‘s temple and that of Solomon were on the same plan; and that the latter temple was intended to be an exact resemblance of the former.

Verse 6
The side chambers were three - We find by Joseph. Antiq. 8:3,2, that round Solomon‘s temple were chambers three stories high, each story consisting of thirty chambers. It is supposed that twelve were placed to the north of the temple, twelve to the south, and six to the east.

Entered into the wall - The beams were admitted into the outer wall, but they rested on projections of the inner wall.

Verse 7
An enlarging, and a winding about - Perhaps a winding staircase that-widened upward as the inner wall decreased in thickness; this wall being six cubits thick; as high as the first story, five from the floor of the second story to that of the third, and four from the floor to the ceiling of the third story: and thus there was a rest of one cubit in breadth to support the stories. - Newcome.

Verse 9
The thickness of the wall - See LLL in the plan.

The place of the side chambers - A walk, or gallery of communication along the chambers, five cubits broad, Ezekiel 41:11.

Verse 11
And the doors - See the plan, aa. bb.

Verse 12
The length thereof ninety cubits - The temple, with the buildings which surrounded it, was eighty-one cubits long; add ten cubits for the vestibule, or five for the breadth of the separate place, and five for its wall; in all, ninety cubits. See the plan, LHIL. By the separate place I suppose the temple itself is meant.

Verse 13
So he measured the house - The temple, taken from the wall which encompassed it from the western side to the vestibule, was one hundred and one cubits; five for the separate place, nine for the wall and the chambers attached to the temple, sixty for the sanctuary and the holy place, ten for the vestibule, and twelve for the two great walls on the west and east of the temple; in all, one hundred and one cubits, See the plan, GHI.

Verse 14
The breadth of the face of the house - That is, the front. See the plan, FRR.

Verse 18
A palm tree was between a cherub and a cherub - That is, the palm trees and the cherubs were alternated; and each cherub had two faces, one of a lion and the other of a man; one of which was turned to the palm tree on the right, the other to the palm tree on the left.

Verse 20
From the ground unto above the door - The temple was thirty cubits high, 1 Kings 6:2, the gate was fourteen cubits, chap. Ezekiel 40:48. The palm trees and the cherubim were the same height as the gate or door. The windows were above the door.

Verse 22
The altar of wood - This was the altar of incense, and was covered with plates of gold.

Verse 25
There were thick planks - The wood, or planks, were thick and strong; for the cherubim and palm trees were carved in relief out of their substance, and unless they had been of considerable thickness, this could not have been done.