Introduction
The several portions of land appointed for the sanctuary, Ezekiel 45:1-5, the city, 6, and the prince, Ezekiel 45:7, Ezekiel 45:8. Regulations concerning the weights and measures, Ezekiel 45:9-12; with ordinances respecting the provisions for the ordinary and extraordinary sacrifices, Ezekiel 45:13-25.

Verse 1
When ye shall divide by lot - That is, when on your repossessing your land, every family settles according to the allotment which they formerly had; for it is certain that the land was not divided afresh by lot after the Babylonish captivity. The allotment mentioned and described here was merely for the service of the temple, the use of the priests, and the prince or governor of the people. A division of the whole land is not intended.

Verse 2
Of this there shall be for the sanctuary - See the plan, A.

Verse 3
And of this measure - See the plan, A, B, C, D, E.

Verse 4
The holy portion - See the plan, A.

Verse 5
And the five and twenty thousand - See the plan, B.

Verse 6
Ye shall appoint - See the plan, FF.

Verse 7
A portion shall be for the prince - נשיא (nasi), he who had the authority of chief magistrate; for there was neither king nor prince among the Jews after the Babylonish captivity. For these allotments and divisions, see the plan, EE, FF, GG.

Verse 8
My princes shall no more oppress my people - By exorbitant taxes to maintain profligate courts, or subsidize other powers to help to keep up a system of tyranny in the earth. The former princes even robbed the temple of God to give subsidies to other states.

Verse 9
Take away your exactions from my people - This is the voice of God to all the rulers of the earth.
Take away your exactions; do not oppress the people; they are mine. Abolish all oppressive taxes.

Verse 10
Ye shall have just balances - This appreciation of weights, measures, and money was intended to show them that they must not introduce those to which they had been accustomed in the captivity, but those which God had prescribed to their forefathers. See the notes on the parallel places.

Verse 16
All - this oblation for the prince - A present or offering to the prince.

Verse 18
Thou shalt take a young bullock - and cleanse the sanctuary - There is nothing of this in the Mosaic law; it seems to have been a new ceremony. An annual purification of the sanctuary may be intended.

Verse 20
For him that is simple - That wants understanding to conduct himself properly.

Verse 25
In the seventh month - He shall do at the feast of tabernacles the same things that he was desired to do on the passover. The prince should offer the same number of victims, of the same quality, and with the same ceremonies, as during the above seven days. The offerings were, sin-offerings, burnt-offerings, and peace-offerings.