Introduction
The twelve sons of Jacob, 1 Chronicles 2:1, 1 Chronicles 2:2. The posterity of Judah down to David, 1 Chronicles 2:3-15. The posterity of the children of Jesse and Caleb, vv. 16-55.

Verse 1
These are the sons of Israel - For this genealogy see the parallel places at Genesis 29:32; Genesis 30:5; Genesis 35:18, Genesis 35:22; Genesis 46:8, etc.

Verse 6
Five of them in all - “These were all chief men; and on them the spirit of prophecy rested.” - T.

Verse 17
Jether the Ishmeelite - “They called him Jether, because he girded himself with his sword, that he might assist David with the Arabians, when Abner was endeavoring to destroy David and the whole race of Jesse, as being unfit to enter into the congregation of the Lord, on account of Ruth the Moabitess.” - T.

Verse 18
Azubah - “And why was she called Azubah? Because she was barren and despised. But her injury was manifested before the Lord; and she was comforted, and adorned with wisdom; and she span, skilfully, goats‘ hair for the court of the tabernacle.” - T.

Verse 20
Uri begat Bezaleel - This was probably the famous artist mentioned Exodus 31:2 (note), etc., where see the notes.

Verse 34
Whose name was Jarha - “And he gave him his liberty, and gave him Sheshan his daughter to wife.” - T.

Verse 42
Now the sons of Caleb - This was not Caleb the son of Jephunneh, but Caleb the son of Hezron, 1 Chronicles 2:18, 1 Chronicles 2:50. But some think that Caleb the son of Hezron was the grandson of Caleb, son of Jephunneh; but this is probably fanciful.

The father of Ziph - “The prince of the Ziphites.” - T.

Verse 52
Shobal - had sons - “Disciples and priests, to whom belonged the half of the oblations.” - T.

Verse 53
The families of Kirjath-jearim - “These were the children of Moses, which Zipporah bare to him, viz., the Jethrites, the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of these came the disciples of the prophets Zarah and Eshtaol.” - T.

Verse 54
The sons of Salma - “The righteous Bethlehemites, who had a good name, as the Netophathites, who removed the guards which Jeroboam had placed in the way lest the people should carry the first-fruits to Jerusalem: for the sons of Salma carried baskets full of first-fruits privately to Jerusalem; and having cloven wood, they made ladders, and brought them to Jerusalem to be laid up in Beth-mokad for oblations. These came from the lineage of Joab the son of Zeruiah; and some of them were priests; and they divided the residue of the sacrifices with the sons of the prophets who were in Zorah.” - T.

Verse 55
The families - “The families of the Rechabites, the sons of Eliezer the son of Misco, the disciple of Jabez; he was Othniel, the son of Kenaz. And he was called Jabez, because in his council he instituted a school of disciples; they were called Tirathim, because in their hymns their voice was like trumpets; and Shimathim, because in hearing they lifted up their faces, i.e., in prayer; and Suchathim, because they were overshadowed by the Spirit of prophecy. These Salmaei were the children of Zipporah, who were numbered among the Levites who came from the stock of Moses, the master of Israel, whose righteousness profited them more than chariots and horses.” - T. See on 1 Chronicles 4:9-10 (note).
Is the above explanation of Tirathites, Shimeathites, and Suchathites, the Targumist refers to the import of the Hebrew roots, whence these names are derived. See 1 Chronicles 4:10. In this chapter many names of cities are given as the names of men.